Add ZEP 8 (URL syntax) draft (#48)
zarr-developers/zeps: draft/ZEP0008.md

```

where a `base_url` specifies an absolute resource location, such as
`file:/path/to/local/file`, and `adapter` specifies a nested resource using a
specified protocol, such as `zip:path/within/zip`.  The `base_url` and each of
the `adapter` portions are considered "sub-URLs".

For a given `adapter`, the sequence of `base_url` and prior `adpater` sub-URLs is
called the "parent URL".

The following `base_url` schemes are defined:

- `file:` as defined by [RFC8089](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8089).

- `http:` and `https:`

- `s3://bucket/path/within/bucket` for AWS S3

- `gs://bucket/path/within/bucket` for Google Cloud Storage (GCS)

The following `adapter` URL schemes are defined:

- `zip:path/within/zip`

   The parent URL must refer to a ZIP file.

- `zarr3:path/within/hierarchy`

   The parent URL must refer to a directory containing a zarr v3 group, with a
   path that optionally ends in `/`.

   Depending on the context in which the URL is specified, if it is not already
   implied that the URL specifies a Zarr v3 node, it may be required to
   terminate the URL with `|zarr3` to indicate that it is a Zarr v3 node even if

>    no path within a Zarr hierarchy needs to be specified.

Author: I added the "context-dependent URL pipeline interpretation" section to try to clarify this.

- `..:path/within/outer/sub-URL` and `..:/path/within/outer/sub-URL` may be used
  to traverse out from the prior adapter.

  Any `..` adapters are resolved in order.  The presence of a `..` adapter
  causes the prior adapter to be discarded,.  The path component is interpreted
  relative to the path of the sub-URL immediately prior to the discarded adapter
  sub-URL.

  It is an error if there are no remaining adapter sub-URLs when resolving the
  `..` adapter.

  For security, implementation SHOULD place limits on where this scheme is
  permitted.

If the adapter URL would otherwise consist of just the scheme followed by ":",
it is permitted to omit the final ":".  For example:

- `https://example.com/path/to/archive.zip|zip|zarr3` is equivalent to

>   `httsps://example.com/path/to/archive.zip|zip:|zarr3:`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `https://example.com/path/to/archive.zip|zip:|zarr3:`.
```

It is expected that additional URL schemes may be standardized in the future.

#### Examples

Examples:

- `https://server.example.com:1234/path/to/array`

   Specifies a normal HTTPS URL.

- `s3://bucket/path/to/file`

   Specifies:
   - within the AWS S3 bucket named `bucket`,
   - the path `path/to/file`.

- `gs://bucket/path/to/outer.zip|zip:path/to/inner.zip|zip:path/to/zarr/hierarchy|zarr3:path/to/array`

  Specifies:
  - within the GCS bucket named `bucket`,
  - within the ZIP file at the path `path/to/outer.zip`,
  - within the ZIP file at the path `path/to/inner.zip`,
  - within the Zarr v3 hierarchy at the path `path/to/zarr/hierarchy/`,
  - the Zarr v3 node at the path `path/to/array/`.

- `gs://bucket/path/to/outer.zip|zip:path/to/inner.zip|..:other/zarr/hierarchy|zarr3:path/to/array`

  Normalizes to:

  `gs://bucket/path/to/other/zarr/hierarchy/|zarr3:path/to/array`

### Relative URL syntax

```

> relative_zarr_url := ( absolute_path / relative_path ) *( "|" adapter )

Author: I clarified the language, and refer to the examples below.

paths and sub-URL schemes as the user types.

The sub-URL delimiter of `|` was chosen because it is not a valid URL character,
and therefore does not have any existing valid interpretation within URLs, and
also is evocative of POSIX shell pipe syntax.

## Related Work

### fsspec

The [fsspec](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) library is
widely used with the zarr-python library to access a variety of storage systems,
and includes support for ZIP files and other nested stores.

Like this proposal, the fsspec URL syntax consists of a sequence of sub-URLs
separated by a delimiter, but differs as follows:

- fsspec uses a delimiter of `::` rather than `|` as used in this proposal.
- fsspec orders sub-URLs from innermost to outermost, which is the opposite
  order from what is proposed here.

The use of `::` as a delimiter of the sub-URLs means that fsspec URLs may
conform to the syntax of a normal URL, because `::` is permitted within the
path, query, and fragment components of a URL.  This has both advantages and
disadvantages:

- An fsspec URL may be accepted by existing URL parsers/matchers not
  specifically designed for fsspec.

> - Because the interpreation the `::` delimiter within an fsspec URL differs from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Because the interpretation of the `::` delimiter within an fsspec URL differs from
```

### Absolute URL syntax

The proposed "zarr URL pipeline syntax" has the following ABNF grammar:

```
absolute_url_pipeline = root_url *( "|" adapter )
```

where a `root_url` specifies an absolute resource location, such as
`file:/path/to/local/file`, and `adapter` specifies a nested resource using a
specified protocol, such as `zip:path/within/zip`.  The `root_url` and each of
the `adapter` portions are considered "sub-URLs".

For a given `adapter`, the sequence of `root_url` and prior `adapter`
sub-URLs is called the "base URL".

The following `root_url` schemes are defined:

- `file:` as defined by [RFC8089](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8089).

  `file:/absolute/path` and `file:///absolute/path` are supported.

  Implementations that have a *current working directory* MAY support
  the non-standard extension `file:relative/path` where
  `relative/path` is resolved relative to the current working
  directory.

  Implementations SHOULD not support `file://relative/path` since that
  is ambiguous with the `file://hostname/path` syntax defined by
  [RFC8089](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8089).

>   If the path is empty or ends with `/`, the resultant resource kind

Author: Note that this particular comment applies specifically to the file: scheme, not to all schemes.

What exactly are you concerned about?

  is known syntatically to be a `directory`.

  Otherwise, the resultant resource kind may be either `file` or
  `directory`.

- `ocdbt:` for [OCDBT](https://google.github.io/tensorstore/kvstore/ocdbt/index.html)

  The base URL must refer to a `directory` resource (which is expected
  to be in OCDBT format).

  The URL syntax is `ocdbt:path` or `ocdbt:@version/path`, where
  `version` is either `v123` or `2025-01-01T01:23:45.678Z`.

  For example:

  - `file:///tmp/dataset.ocdbt/|ocdbt:@v1/path/within/database`
  - `file:///tmp/dataset.ocdbt/|ocdbt:path/within/database`
  - `file:///tmp/dataset.ocdbt/|ocdbt:@2025-01-01T01:23:45.678Z/path/within/database`

  While `@` is normally allowed within the path component of a URL,
  with the `ocdbt:` URL scheme, if the path starts with `@` it must be
  percent-encoded as `%40` to avoid ambiguity with the `@version`
  component.  For example, a path of `@abc` can be specified as
  `ocdbt:%40abc`.

  The resultant resource kind may be either `file` or `directory`.

  For the purpose of relative URLs, the path component does not include the
  `@version/` prefix if present.

- `icechunk:` for [Icechunk](https://icechunk.io/en/latest/)

>   The base URL msut refer to a `directory` resource (which is expected

Author: Done.

  to contain an Icechunk database).

  The following syntaxes are supported:

>   - `icechunk:path/to/node/`

Author: Done.

  - `icechunk:@branch.BRANCH/path/to/node/`
  - `icechunk:@tag.TAG/path/to/node/`

>   - `icechunk:@SNAPSHOT/path/to/node/`

Reviewer 3: How do I point to an Icechunk repo, without a specific node? Is it something like `file:///foo/bar/icechunk:`

Author: > How do I point to an Icechunk repo, without a specific node? Is it something like `file:///foo/bar/icechunk:`

`file:///foo/bar/|icechunk:`

would refer to the root of the main branch.

Reviewer 3: Can we add this as an example, it's probably the most common thing people will want to do.

  For example:

>   - `file:///path/to/repo.zarr.icechunk/|icechunk:|zarr3:path/to/array/`

Reviewer 3: Alright, I think I like it. Icechunk implementation are free to accept `icechunk:/foo/bar`.

  - `file:///path/to/repo.zarr.icechunk/|icechunk:@branch.other/|zarr3:path/to/array/`
  - `file:///path/to/repo.zarr.icechunk/|icechunk:@tag.v5/|zarr3:path/to/array/`
  - `file:///path/to/repo.zarr.icechunk/|icechunk:@4N0217AZA4VNPYD0HR0G/|zarr3:path/to/array/`

  While `@` is normally allowed within the path component of a URL,
  with the `icechunk:` URL scheme, if the path starts with `@` it must
  be percent-encoded as `%40` to avoid ambiguity with the `@version`
  component.  For example, a path of `@abc/` can be specified as
  `icechunk:%40abc/`.

  If the path is empty or ends with `/`, the resultant resource kind
  is known syntatically to be a `directory`.

  Otherwise, the resultant resource kind may be either `file` or
  `directory`.

  For the purpose of relative URLs, the path component does not include the

>   `@version/` prefix if present.

Author: Done.

  to contain an N5 hierarchy.

  Because N5 is defined to inherit attributes from ancestor groups in the
  hierarchy, it is recommended that the base URL refers to the root of the n5
  hierarchy, and any path within the hierarchy be specified through the `n5:`
  scheme.

  The resultant resource kind is always `dataset`.

- `gzip:`, `zstd:` for transparent access to compressed files

  The base URL must refer to a `file` resource, which is expected to be in the
  format indicated by the URL scheme.

  Currently no path is supported.

  The resultant resource kind is always `file`.

  For example:

  - `gs://bucket/path/to/data.gz|gzip:`
  - `gs://bucket/path/to/data.zstd|zstd:`

- `byte-range:start-end` for specifying a byte range within a file

  The base URL must refer to a `file` resource, which is expected to support
  byte range access.

  The `start` and `end` components of the URL specify byte offsets in base 10.
  The `start` bound is inclusive while the `end` bound is exclusive; the total
  length is `end - start`.

  The resultant resource kind is always `file`.

  For example:

  - `gs://bucket/path/to/data|byte-range:1000-2000`

> - `tiff:`, `jpeg:`, `png:`, `bmp:`, `avif:`, `webp:`

Author: Yes, some of these aren't relevant to a zarr implementation at the moment. But note that they might be relevant in the context of the proposed chunk manifest or other virtual array proposals.  In particular the byte-range URL scheme could eliminate the need to separately specify offset and length inside a chunk manifest.

the same software):

- `open_array`: opens an arbitrary array from a URL

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `file` or `directory` resource, performs
  format auto-detection to obtain a `dataset` resource.

  If format auto-detection fails or the resultant `dataset` resource is not an
  array, fails with an error.

  Otherwise, opens the resolved URL as an array.

- `open_zarr_array`: opens a zarr array from a URL with format auto-detection

  Same as `open_array`, except that if the resolved `dataset` resource is not a
  zarr array, fails.

- `open_zarr_array_without_auto_detection`: opens a zarr array without format
  auto-detection

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `file` resource, fails with an error.

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `directory` resource, append the `zarr:`
  adapter and open it.

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `dataset` resource, open it and fail if it
  is not in zarr format.

- `open_kvstore`: opens a key-value store file or directory from a URL

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `file` or `directory` resource, opens it.

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `dataset` resource, returns an error.

> - `open_file`: opens a file from a URL

Author: Yes, `tiff:` isn't directly relevant to zarr, but is useful for implementations that aren't specific to zarr.  `byte-range` could be relevant to zarr in the context of a chunk manifest.

    `../another/array/` would refer to
    `s3://bucket/path/to/dataset.zip|zip:path/another/array/`.  To refer to
    `s3://bucket/path/of/another.zip|zip:other/array/`, the relative URL
    pipeline `..:../of/another.zip|zip:other/array/|zarr3:` can be used.

The relative URL pipeline syntax has the following ABNF grammar:

```
relative_url_pipeline = ( absolute_path / relative_path ) *( "|" adapter )
                      / absolute_url_pipeline
```

A relative zarr URL is always resolved relative to a specified base URL
pipeline.  The initial `absolute_path` or `relative_path` applies to the path
component of the inner-most (last) sub-URL.  If the `relative_path` is the empty
string, the path component of the inner-most sub-URL remains unchanged.  After
applying the `absolute_path` or `relative_path` to the existing absolute URL,
any specified adapter sub-URLs are appended.

Note: An `absolute_path` overrides any existing *path* component of the
inner-most sub-URL of the base , but is still relative to the scheme and other
components of the inner-most sub-URL of the base URL pipeline that precede its
path component, if any.  The specific scheme of the sub-URL defines what

> portion, if any, constitutes the path component.

Author: Done, added example of absolute path.
